What is depression?
Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass. Depression (also called major depression, major depressive disorder, or clinical depression) is different. It can cause severe symptoms that affect how a person feels, thinks, and handles daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working.

Depression can affect anyone regardless of age, gender, race or ethnicity, income, culture, or education. Research suggests that genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in the disorder.
Women are diagnosed with depression more often than men, but men can also be depressed. Because men may be less likely to recognize, talk about, and seek help for their negative feelings, they are at greater risk of their depression symptoms being undiagnosed and undertreated. Studies also show higher rates of depression and an increased risk for the disorder among members of the LGBTQI+ community.

In addition, depression can co-occur with other mental disorders or chronic illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and chronic pain. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes, medications taken for an illness cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms as well.

What are the different types of depression?
There are two common types of depression: major depression, and seasonal affective disorder.

Major depression includes symptoms of depressed mood or loss of interest, most of the time for at least 2 weeks, that interfere with daily activities.
Persistent depressive disorder (also called dysthymia or dysthymic disorder) consists of less severe depression symptoms that last much longer, usually for at least 2 years.
Other types of depression include the following.

Seasonal affective disorder comes and goes with the seasons, with symptoms typically starting in the late fall and early winter and going away during the spring and summer.
Depression with symptoms of psychosis is a severe form of depression in which a person experiences psychosis symptoms, such as delusions or hallucinations.
Bipolar disorder involves depressive episodes, as well as manic episodes (or less severe hypomanic episodes) with unusually elevated mood, greater irritability, or increased activity level.
Additional types of depression can occur at specific points in a woman’s life. Pregnancy, the postpartum period, the menstrual cycle, and menopause are associated with physical and hormonal changes that can bring on a depressive episode in some people.

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder is a more severe form of premenstrual syndrome, or PMS, that occurs in the weeks before menstruation.
Perinatal depression occurs during pregnancy or after childbirth. It is more than the “baby blues” many new moms experience after giving birth.
Perimenopausal depression affects some women during the transition to menopause. Women may experience feelings of intense irritability, anxiety, sadness, or loss of enjoyment.

Not everyone who is depressed shows all depression symptoms. Some people experience only a few symptoms, while others experience many. Depression symptoms interfere with day-to-day functioning and cause significant distress for the person experiencing them.
If you show signs or symptoms of depression and they persist or do not go away, talk to a health care provider. If you see signs of depression in someone you know, encourage them to seek help from a mental health professional.
If you or someone you know is struggling or having thoughts of suicide, call or text the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline  at 988 or chat at 988lifeline.org . In life-threatening situations, call 911.

How is depression diagnosed?
To be diagnosed with depression, a person must have symptoms most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 2 weeks. One of the symptoms must be a depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure in most activities. Children and adolescents may be irritable rather than sad.
Although several persistent symptoms, in addition to low mood, are required for a depression diagnosis, people with only a few symptoms may benefit from treatment. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last vary depending on the person.

If you think you may have depression, talk to a health care provider, such as a primary care doctor, psychologist, or psychiatrist. During the visit, the provider may ask when your symptoms began, how long they have lasted, how often they occur, and if they keep you from going out or doing your usual activities. It may help to take some notes about your symptoms before the visit.

Certain medications and medical conditions, such as viruses or thyroid disorders, can cause the same symptoms as depression. A provider can rule out these possibilities by doing a physical exam, interview, and lab tests.

How is depression treated?
Depression treatment typically involves psychotherapy (in person or virtual), medication, or both. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms sufficiently, brain stimulation therapy may be another option.

Choosing the right treatment plan is based on a person’s needs, preferences, and medical situation and in consultation with a mental health professional or a health care provider. Finding the best treatment may take trial and error.

For milder forms of depression, psychotherapy is often tried first, with medication added later if the therapy alone does not produce a good response. People with moderate or severe depression usually are prescribed medication as part of the initial treatment plan.

Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy (also called talk therapy or counseling) can help people with depression by teaching them new ways of thinking and behaving and helping them change habits that contribute to depression. Psychotherapy occurs under the care of a licensed, trained mental health professional in one-on-one sessions or with others in a group setting.

Psychotherapy can be effective when delivered in person or virtually via telehealth. A provider may support or supplement therapy using digital or mobile technology, like apps or other tools.

Evidence-based therapies to treat depression include cognitive behavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy. Using other forms of psychotherapy, such as psychodynamic therapy, for a limited time also may help some people with depression.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT): With CBT, people learn to challenge and change unhelpful thoughts and behaviors to improve their depressive and anxious feelings. Recent advances in CBT include adding mindfulness principles and specializing the therapy to target specific symptoms like insomnia.

Interpersonal therapy (IPT): IPT focuses on interpersonal and life events that impact mood and vice versa. IPT aims to help people improve their communication skills within relationships, form social support networks, and develop realistic expectations to better deal with crises or other issues that may be contributing to or worsening their depression.
Learn more about psychotherapy.

Medication
Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. They work by changing how the brain produces or uses certain chemicals involved in mood or stress.

Antidepressants take time—usually 4−8 weeks—to work, and problems with sleep, appetite, and concentration often improve before mood lifts. Giving a medication a chance to work is important before deciding whether it is right for you.

Treatment-resistant depression occurs when a person doesn’t get better after trying at least two antidepressants. Esketamine is a medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment-resistant depression. Delivered as a nasal spray in a doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital, the medication acts rapidly, typically within a couple of hours, to relieve depression symptoms. People will usually continue to take an antidepressant pill to maintain the improvement in their symptoms.

Another option for treatment-resistant depression is to combine an antidepressant with a different type of medication that may make it more effective, such as an antipsychotic or anticonvulsant medication.

All medications can have side effects. Talk to a health care provider before starting or stopping any medication. Learn more about antidepressants from your healthcare provider.

Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 years may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. The FDA advises that patients of all ages taking antidepressants be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.

Information about medication changes frequently. Learn more about specific medications like esketamine, including the latest approvals, side effects, warnings, and patient information, on the FDA website .

Brain stimulation therapy
Brain stimulation therapy is an option when other depression treatments have not worked. The therapy involves activating or inhibiting the brain with electricity or magnetic waves.

Although brain stimulation therapy is less frequently used than psychotherapy and medication, it can play an important role in treating depression in people who have not responded to other treatments. The therapy generally is used only after a person has tried psychotherapy and medication, and those treatments usually continue. Brain stimulation therapy is sometimes used as an earlier treatment option when severe depression has become life-threatening, such as when a person has stopped eating or drinking or is at a high risk of suicide.

The FDA has approved several types of brain stimulation therapy. The most used are electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). Other brain stimulation therapies are newer and, in some cases, still considered experimental. Learn more about brain stimulation therapies.

Natural products
The FDA has not approved any natural products for treating depression. Although research is ongoing and findings are inconsistent, some people report that natural products, including vitamin D and the herbal dietary supplement St. John’s wort, helped their depression symptoms. However, these products can come with risks, including, in some cases, interactions with prescription medications.

Do not use vitamin D, St. John’s wort, or other dietary supplements or natural products without first talking to a health care provider. Rigorous studies must test whether these and other natural products are safe and effective.

How can I take care of myself?
Most people with depression benefit from mental health treatment. Once you begin treatment, you should gradually start to feel better. Go easy on yourself during this time. Try to do things you used to enjoy. Even if you don’t feel like doing them, they can improve your mood.

Other things that may help:
Try to get physical activity. Just 30 minutes a day of walking can boost your mood.
Try to maintain a regular bedtime and wake-up time.
Eat regular, healthy meals.
Do what you can as you can. Decide what must get done and what can wait.
Connect with people. Talk to people you trust about how you are feeling.
Delay making important life decisions until you feel better. Discuss decisions with people who know you well.
Avoid using alcohol, nicotine, or drugs, including medications not prescribed for you.
How can I find help for depression?
You can learn about ways to get help and find tips for talking with a health care provider on the NIMH website.

The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) also has an online tool to help you find mental health services  in your area.

How can I help a loved one who is depressed?
If someone you know is depressed, help them see a health care provider or mental health professional. You also can:
Offer support, understanding, patience, and encouragement.
Invite them out for walks, outings, and other activities.
Help them stick to their treatment plan, such as setting reminders to take prescribed medications.
Make sure they have transportation or access to therapy appointments.
Remind them that, with time and treatment, their depression can lift.

What are clinical trials and why are they important?
Clinical trials are research studies that look at ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. These studies help show whether a treatment is safe and effective in people. Some people join clinical trials to help doctors and researchers learn more about a disease and improve health care. Other people, such as those with health conditions, join to try treatments that aren’t widely available.

NIMH supports clinical trials across the United States. Talk to a health care provider about clinical trials and whether one is right for you. Learn more about participating in clinical trials.

How to cope with depression
Try these coping strategies if you're feeling depressed.

Stay in touch
Don't withdraw from life. Socialising can improve your mood. Keeping in touch with friends and family means you have someone to talk to when you feel low.  

Be more active
Take up some form of exercise. There's evidence that exercise can help lift your mood. If you haven't exercised for a while, start gently by walking for 20 minutes every day. 

Read about exercise for depression.

Face your fears
Don't avoid the things you find difficult. When people feel low or anxious, they sometimes avoid talking to other people. Some people can lose their confidence in going out, driving or travelling.

If this starts to happen, facing up to these situations will help them become easier.

Don't drink too much alcohol
For some people, alcohol can become a problem. You may drink more than usual as a way of coping with or hiding your emotions, or just to fill time. But alcohol won't help you solve your problems and could also make you feel more depressed.

Read some tips on cutting down on alcohol.

Try to eat a healthy diet
Some people don't feel like eating when they're depressed and are at risk of becoming underweight. Others find comfort in food and can put on excess weight.

Antidepressants can also affect your appetite.
If you're concerned about weight loss, weight gain or how antidepressants are affecting your appetite, talk to your GP.

See tips on how to eat more healthily. Not having a routine can affect your eating. Try to carry on cooking and eating regular meals.

Have a routine
When people feel down, they can get into poor sleep patterns, staying up late and sleeping during the day. Try to get up at your normal time and stick to your routine as much as possible.

Seeking help for depression
Get help if you're still feeling down or depressed after a couple of weeks.

You can refer yourself for talking therapies like cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) or counselling on the NHS. You don't need a referral from your GP.

Find talking therapy services in your area
If you’re under 18, or want to get help for someone under 18, find out how to get mental health support for children and young people.

Treatments for depression include talking therapies and antidepressants.
You can talk it through with your GP first if you prefer. Your GP can also tell you about antidepressants.

If you start to feel that your life isn't worth living or about harming yourself, get help straight away.
Depression and anxiety might seem pretty distinct, for the most part.

The main symptom of depression is typically a lingering low, sad, or hopeless mood, while anxiety mainly involves overwhelming feelings of worry, nervousness, and fear.
But these conditions do actually share several key signs. Anxiety, for example, often involves irritability — and some people with depression may feel more irritable than sad.
Since these conditions can show up differently from person to person, you may not always know exactly what your symptoms mean.

It’s also possible to have both depression and anxiety at the same time: A worldwide survey from 2015 found that 41.6 percent of people reported having both major depression and an anxiety disorder during the same 12-month period.
One important thing depression and anxiety have in common? Both can improve with support from a mental health professional.

Below, we’ll break down the main symptoms and signs of each condition, plus offer some strategies for coping with symptoms and tips to find support.

Need help now?
If you’re having thoughts of suicide, you can get support right away by calling or texting a crisis helpline.
Trained crisis counselors can offer calm, compassionate support and guidance with managing overwhelming feelings of distress.
For free, confidential support 24/7, 365 days a year:
Call 800-273-8255 to reach the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline.
Text “HOME” to 741-741 to reach the Crisis Text Line.
Here’s how to help a loved one thinking about suicide.

Anxiety
Most people experience some anxiety — feelings of fear, nervousness, and worry — from time to time. Anxiety is part of how you respond to stress, after all, so you might experience some anxiety:
before major life events
when making important decisions
when trying something new
But if you experience persistent or extreme anxiety on most days for several months, you could have generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) or another anxiety disorder.

Anxiety disorders go beyond worry about unexpected or challenging life circumstances. Your fears might center around more everyday concerns, such as your health, performance at school and work, or relationships. These worries can prompt lingering thoughts and fears that eventually begin to affect daily life.
With anxiety, you might find yourself:
stuck in a cycle where you explore, over and over, all the possible ways a situation could go wrong
unable to stop thinking about all the things worrying you, even when you know you can’t do anything about them

With depression, you might find yourself:
fixating on guilt about not having energy to spend time with friends
going over and over past events and blaming yourself for things you have no control over, including feelings of depression
Get tips on breaking a cycle of rumination.

Questions to ask yourself
Again, it’s very common to feel low or sad, stressed or anxious, or any combination of the above, on occasion.

All the same, you’re the best person to recognize what’s typical for you. If you start to experience new, uncomfortable feelings, changes in your energy and motivation, or any other unusual symptoms, it never hurts to connect with a mental health professional for more guidance.

It’s always a good idea to get professional support for symptoms that:
last longer than a week or so
create problems in your daily life or personal relationships
begin to affect your physical health
In therapy, you can get support with exploring the symptoms you’ve noticed and addressing them, whether they relate to depression, anxiety, or another concern entirely.

Getting a diagnosis
If you’re not feeling quite like yourself, a good next step involves reaching out to a mental health professional or other clinician who treats anxiety and depression.

Your regular clinician, if you have one, can offer a referral to a therapist. Depending on your symptoms, they might also recommend blood, urine, and other lab testing to help rule out underlying medical concerns. Certain health conditions, including thyroid conditions, can involve depression and other changes in mood.

No single test can diagnose depression or anxiety. Instead, your therapist will generally start by asking questions about your symptoms, including how long you’ve had them and how they affect your daily life, to get more insight on what you’re experiencing.

Keep in mind an open and honest description of your mood can help them better understand how you’re feeling, which can lead them to the correct diagnosis.

A good therapist won’t judge you or say you shouldn’t feel a certain way. They’ll listen with compassion and offer support with identifying and addressing your symptoms.

According to criteria in the “Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-5),” diagnosis requires:
For depression: You experience at least 5 of the 9 main symptoms of depression most days, for at least 2 weeks.
For anxiety: You experience excessive, uncontrollable worry, along with 3 additional anxiety symptoms most days, for at least 6 months.
If you meet criteria for both conditions, a mental health professional will typically diagnose both.

Managing anxiety and depression
A therapist can offer more guidance on treatment options for anxiety and depression, but you can also take steps to cope with symptoms on your own.

The strategies below may not always help, but trying different approaches at different times can help you learn more about what works for you. That insight can guide you toward a personalized toolbox of coping strategies, so you always have options to consider when feeling distressed or overwhelmed.

Your therapist can also offer suggestions for new strategies to try, plus offer tips on putting them into practice.

1. Allow yourself to feel what you’re feeling
Depression and anxiety are medical conditions, not the result of failure or weakness, and they’re absolutely not your fault.
Without a doubt, the unwanted emotions they cause can lead to plenty of distress. But knowing depression and anxiety result from underlying causes and triggers, not anything you did or didn’t do, can promote self-compassion instead of criticism or self-punishment.

2. Do something you have control over
Regaining some control in the moment could help overwhelming feelings feel a little easier to cope with.
You don’t have to take any major action, but accomplishing a short task, such as making your bed, taking a shower, or unloading the dishwasher, can help boost a sense of accomplishment. It could also offer a temporary distraction.

3. Maintain a routine
A daily routine or regular schedule can create structure in your life and promote a sense of control, so it can sometimes help ease feelings of anxiety and depression.
Creating a schedule also offers the opportunity to build space into your day for self-care techniques that could make even more of a difference.

4. Aim to get a good night’s sleep
Not enough sleep can worsen symptoms of both anxiety and depression — but too much sleep can also affect well-being and mood.
Experts recommend most adults get between 7 and 9 hoursTrusted Source of sleep each night for optimal health.

These tips can help you get the sleep you need:
Make a habit of going to bed and getting up around the same time each day.
Turn off electronic devices about 1 hour before bedtime.
Create a soothing ritual that helps you wind down before bed.
Keep your bedroom dark, cool, and quiet.

5. Try to eat balanced meals
Nourishing your body with whole foods, including fruits, vegetables, lean protein, and whole grains, can help you get the nutrition you need — and it could also help improve your symptoms.

Caffeine, refined sugars, and processed foods, on the other hand, could potentially worsen symptoms of both anxiety and depression.
You don’t need to cut these out of your diet entirely, but try to balance them with nutrient-dense foods when possible.

6. Try a walk around the block
According to 2019 research, 2.5 hours of exercise each week can help relieve both depression and anxiety. Exercising outside also appeared to offer more benefits than exercising indoors.
Physical activity can help naturally boost your mood by prompting the release of “happy hormones” in your brain.

That said, exercising when living with depression or anxiety can be a challenge. If you’re able to exercise, it can help to start with small activities you can incorporate into your routine, such as:
a walk around your neighborhood after dinner
a weekend hike
walking or biking to work instead of driving
gardening

7. Make time for rest and relaxation
Mental health conditions like depression and anxiety can affect your energy and motivation, which often only adds to feelings of guilt and worry.

Remember, though: Depression and anxiety are health conditions. If you had the flu, you’d need time to rest, right? Mental health symptoms require recovery time, too.

Instead of fixating on the things you think you should be doing, honor your needs by taking time for activities that soothe and relax you. Maybe this includes things like:
watching a comforting movie or TV show
re-reading a favorite book
cuddling with a pet
spending time in nature
cooking or baking
listening to music or audiobooks
Relaxation techniques could also help reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety and improve day-to-day life.

A few examples of relaxation techniques include:
breathing exercises
guided imagery
progressive muscle relaxation
massage therapy
yoga
meditation

8. Reach out to loved ones
Strong relationships can go a long way toward improving your outlook and emotional well-being when you live with mental health conditions.

Friends and family can:
listen with compassion when you need to talk
provide encouragement and emotional support
join you in hobbies or activities that offer a positive distraction
offer rides, grocery runs, and other more tangible forms of support when you have trouble getting things done
Simply knowing you have someone you trust in your life can often help you feel less alone, whether you actually want to talk about your symptoms or not.

Treatment
Treating co-occurring depression and anxiety can sometimes be more complicated than treating one condition alone. Even when you get treatment for one condition, some symptoms might persist or seem to play off the others.

For example:
You can’t stop worrying about all the things going wrong in your life, or thinking about the ways things could get worse. These fears eventually drain your energy and motivation to keep trying, leaving you feeling low and hopeless.
Social anxiety keeps you from connecting with people in the ways you’d like. You want to make new friends but generally end up avoiding interactions instead. This leaves you feeling lonely, sad, and guilty, especially when thinking of those missed opportunities, but helpless to do anything differently.
A mental health care professional may recommend combining treatment approaches, since what helps ease depression symptoms may not always relieve anxiety symptoms, and vice versa.

Potential treatments for anxiety and depression include:

Therapy
Many different types of therapy can help treat anxiety or depression.
For example, interpersonal therapy for depression teaches communication strategies you can use to express yourself more effectively and get your emotional needs met. Exposure therapy, an approach that helps you get more comfortable with feared situations, can treat phobias, a type of anxiety.

Other approaches can treat both conditions:

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) teaches techniques to identify, challenge, and reframe unwanted thoughts and behavior patterns.
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy teaches mindfulness techniques along with behavioral techniques to help you begin to manage unwanted feelings and stay present through them instead of becoming overwhelmed.
Acceptance and commitment therapy teaches strategies to accept unwanted or distressing thoughts, stay present, and commit to positive activities that fulfill your personal values.
Problem-solving therapy. This approach teaches using coping skills to manage mental health symptoms and life experiences that cause stress and other emotional turmoil.

Considering online therapy?
Most online therapy services offer treatment for both anxiety and depression, so if you’re hoping to find virtual mental health support, you’ve got a few options to consider.

Medication
Psychotropic medication can also help reduce anxiety and depression symptoms. It doesn’t help you address the cause of those symptoms, though, so your doctor or psychiatrist will typically recommend therapy alongside medication.

A psychiatrist or other clinician might prescribe:
Antidepressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). In some cases, these medications may also relieve anxiety symptoms.
Anti-anxiety medications, including benzodiazepines, buspirone (Buspar), and beta-blockers. These medications can ease anxiety symptoms but may not improve depression symptoms. Benzodiazepines also carry a high risk of dependence, so your prescriber may try other medications first.
Mood stabilizers. These medications may help treat depression symptoms that don’t respond to antidepressants alone.
Other approaches
While these treatments don’t replace therapy or medication, they could still have benefit as part of your treatment plan.

Alternative approaches might include:
hypnotherapy
acupuncture
supplements for depression or anxiety

The bottom line
Anxiety and depression can feel overwhelming, especially when you live with both conditions, or aren’t exactly sure which condition you’re dealing with.

But you don’t have to manage those symptoms alone. Getting support for distress that lasts more than a few days or begins to affect your daily life can go a long way toward helping you find relief.

When it comes to treatment for depression and anxiety, you have plenty of options. A therapist can always offer more guidance with identifying symptoms and possible triggers, and exploring the most helpful approaches to treatment.

Tips to Manage Depression
Depression is a mood disorder that causes persistent feelings of sadness, loss of interest and despair. It can have an impact on cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and physical functions. While sadness, negative thinking, and loneliness affect all of us at one point or another, the symptoms of clinical depression, or major depressive disorder, can be severe, unrelenting, and even frightening. Depression can make you feel like nothing will help, or that any relief will be temporary, and it can create a cycle of maladaptive thinking, feeling, and doing (or non-doing).

However, depression is treatable, and in addition to psychiatric treatment and therapy, there are steps you can take to cope with depression.   

Twelve tips from our ADAA experts:

Get active! 30 minutes of brisk physical activity daily is ideal but even 10 to 15 minutes a day can help. Depression can limit activity but try to push through it.

Nourish your body! Eat well-balanced meals and avoid high-sugar, high-fat, processed foods and alcohol. 

Sleep! Too much sleep is not good for depression but getting enough sleep is essential for mind and body.

Journal! Write down recurring negative thoughts or feelings. Writing helps with personal expression and allows you to identify any distorted thinking and maladaptive behaviors. 
   
Challenge your thinking! Are your distortions true? Or do they just feel real? Are you taking into account the evidence? Does it help to think this way? 

Limit rumination! Excessively rehashing thoughts, memories or moments in time are a part of depression. Try being more aware when it happens and redirect yourself by thinking or doing something more helpful.

Set realistic goals! Rather than tackle a goal on a large scale, break it down so it is smaller and more manageable. Celebrate micro-successes and build on them.

Reduce procrastination! Try to do things a little at a time rather than avoid tasks all together. This can promote a sense of accomplishment and self-efficacy.

Avoid the big decisions! Contemplating or acting on major life decisions should be avoided until your cognitive and decision-making abilities are sharper.

Engage in healthy joyful activities! Try to enjoy the small things like listening to a good song, reaching out to a friend, dancing in your own space, or a cup of tea.

Stay connected! It may feel hard but keep friends and family close. Try to explain what you are experiencing and how they can help. Know you are not alone. 

Practice self-compassion! Being harsh or overly critical is not helpful, give yourself some grace and kindness.   

What helps people cope with depression?
If a person feels sustained, intense feelings of sadness or loss of interest in activities, they may have clinical depression. People also refer to this condition as major depressive disorder.

But there are small steps you can take to help you gain more agency in your life and improve your sense of well-being.

Read on to learn how to incorporate these strategies in a way that makes sense for you.

1. Meet yourself where you are
Depression affects millions of people, including some in your life. You may not realize they face similar challenges, emotions, and obstacles.

Being open, accepting, and loving toward yourself and what you’re going through may help you navigate depression.

Every day with this disorder is different. It’s important to take your mental health seriously and accept that where you are right now isn’t where you’ll always be.


2. Consider a walk around the block
On days when you feel you can’t get out of bed, exercise may seem like the last thing you’d want to do. But exercise and physical activity can help reduce symptoms of depression and improve energy levels.
ResearchTrusted Source suggests that, for some people, exercise can be as effective as medication at relieving depression symptoms. It may also help preventTrusted Source future depressive episodes.
Even when you feel you’re unable to or have little energy, see if you’d be willing to do the opposite of what your mood tells you to do. Instead, set a small goal for yourself, such as walking around the block.

3. Know that today isn’t indicative of tomorrow
Internal emotions and thoughts can change from day to day. Tracking experiences through journaling or keeping a mood diary can help you to remember this.
If you were unsuccessful at getting out of bed or accomplishing goals today, remember that you haven’t lost tomorrow’s opportunity to try again.
Give yourself the grace to accept that while some days will be difficult, others will also be less difficult. Try to look forward to tomorrow’s fresh start.

4. Assess the parts instead of generalizing the whole
Depression can tinge recollections with difficult emotions. You may find yourself focusing on things that are unhelpful or perceived as difficult.
Try to stop this overgeneralization. Push yourself to recognize the good. If it helps, write down what was meaningful about the event or day. You can track what you achieved that day and which activities were enjoyable.
Seeing the weight you’re giving to one thing may help you direct your thoughts away from the whole and to the individual pieces that were helpful.

5. Do the opposite of what the ‘depression voice’ suggests
The automatic, unhelpful voice in your head may talk you out of self-help. But if you learn to recognize this voice, you can learn to work through it.
If you believe an event won’t be fun or worth your time, say to yourself, “You might be right, but it’ll be better than just sitting here another night.” You may soon see that automatic thought isn’t always helpful.
Depression is one of the most common mental health conditions: Learn more.

6. Set attainable goals
Instead of compiling a long list of tasks, consider setting small goals. Setting and accomplishing these goals can provide a sense of control and accomplishment and help with motivation.
Attainable goals may include:
Don’t clean the house; take the trash out.
Don’t do all the laundry that’s piled up; sort the piles for later.
Don’t clear out your entire email inbox; just address any time-sensitive messages.
When you’ve done a small thing, set your eyes on another small thing, and then another. This way, you have a list of tangible achievements and not an untouched to-do list.

7. Reward your efforts
All goals are worthy of recognition, and all successes are worthy of celebration. When you achieve a goal, do your best to recognize it.
You may not feel like celebrating with a cake and confetti, but recognizing your own successes can be a powerful tool for depression’s negative weight.
The memory of a job well done may be especially powerful against unhelpful self-talk and overgeneralization.

8. Create a routine
If depressive symptoms disrupt your daily routine, a gentle schedule may help you feel in control. These plans don’t have to map out an entire day.
Focus on creating a loose but structured routine to help you keep your daily pace.

9. Do something you enjoy
Depression can push you to give in to your fatigue. It may feel more powerful than preferred emotions.
Try to push back and do something you love — something that’s pleasurable or meaningful. It could be playing an instrument, painting, hiking, or biking.
Engaging in meaningful activities lifts your mood or energy, which can further motivate you to continue to engage in activities that help with navigating symptoms.

10. Listen to music
ResearchTrusted Source shows music can improve your mood and symptoms of depression. It may also strengthen your reception of positive emotions.
Music can be especially beneficial when performed in group settings, such as a musical ensemble or band.
You can also reap some of the same rewards simply by listening.

11. Spend time in nature
Time in nature can have a powerful influence on a person’s mood. ResearchTrusted Source suggests that walks in nature may improve depressive symptoms in people with clinical depression.
Time in natural spaces may improve mood and cognition and lower the risk of mental health disorders. But there’s only limited research on the direct effect of nature on those with clinical depression.
Consider taking a walk at lunch among the trees or spending time in your local park. Or plan a weekend hike. These activities can help you reconnect with nature and soak in some rays at the same time.

12. Spend time with loved ones
Depression can tempt you to isolate yourself and withdraw from people you love and trust, but face-to-face time can help wash away those tendencies.
If you’re unable to spend time together in person, phone calls or video chats can also be helpful.
Try to remind yourself these people care about you. Resist the temptation to feel like you’re a burden. You need the interaction — and they likely do too.

13. Express your feelings
Consider writing or journaling about what you’re experiencing. Then, when the feelings lift, write about that too. ResearchTrusted Source suggests that keeping a journal can be a beneficial add-on method for managing mental health conditions.
Writing down your thoughts can help you express what you’re feeling more clearly. It can also help you keep track of your symptoms daily and identify their causes.
You can make a goal to write for a few minutes each day or week. Most importantly, what you want to write about is completely up to you.

14. Try something new entirely
When you do the same thing day after day, you use the same parts of your brain.
Doing new things can feel rewarding and may improve your overall well-being and strengthen your social relationships.
To reap these benefits, consider trying a new sport, creative class, or cooking technique.

15. Try volunteering
You can knock out a few birds with one stone — spending time with other people and doing something new — by volunteering and giving your time to someone or something else.
You may be used to receiving help from friends, but reaching out and providing help may actually improve your mental health more.
Bonus: People who volunteer experience physical benefits too. This includes a lowered riskTrusted Source of hypertension and improved sleep.

16. Practice gratitude
When you do something you love, or even when you find a new activity you enjoy, you may be able to benefit your mental health more by taking time to be thankful for it.
Practicing gratitude can have lasting positive effectsTrusted Source on your overall mental health
What’s more, writing down your gratitude — including in notes to others — can be particularly meaningful.

17. Incorporate meditation
Stress and anxiety can prolong your depression symptoms. Finding relaxation techniques can help you lower stress and invite more joy and balance into your day.
ResearchTrusted Source suggests that mindfulness activities may help you improve your sense of well-being and feel more connected to what’s happening around you. These activities can include:
meditation
yoga
deep breathing
journaling

18. Eat well
There’s no magic diet that will treat depression. But what you put into your body can have a real and significant effect on the way you feel.
Some people also feel better and have more energy when they avoid sugar, preservatives, and processed foods.
If you have the means, consider meeting with a doctor or registered dietitian for guidance.
Eating a diet rich in lean meats, vegetables, and grains may be a great place to start. Try to limit stimulants such as caffeineTrusted Source, coffee, and soda and depressants such as alcoholTrusted Source.

19. Consider limiting drugs and alcohol
Substances such as drugsTrusted Source or alcoholTrusted Source can contribute to perpetuating feelings of sadness.
On the other hand, people who live with addiction may experience symptoms of depressionTrusted Source.
You may want to consider limiting or avoiding the use of alcohol and other substances to help your depressive symptoms.

20. Practice sleep hygiene
Sleep disturbancesTrusted Source are common with depression. You may not sleep well, or you may sleep too much. Both can make depression symptoms worse.
Aim for 8 hours of sleep per night. Try to get into a healthy sleeping routine.
Going to bed and waking up at the same time every day can help you with your daily schedule. Getting the proper amount of sleep may also help you feel more balanced and energized throughout your day.

21. Accept the validity of your emotions
Suppressing and compartmentalizing your feelings may seem like a strategic way to cope with the difficult symptoms of depression. But this technique is ultimately unhealthyTrusted Source and ineffective.
If you’re having a down day, acknowledge it. Notice and name your emotions and try to bring your attention to engaging in activities that are helpful instead of focusing on the emotions.
Seeing the ebb and flow of depressive symptoms can be instructive for both self-healing and hope.

22. Consider treatment
You may also find it helpful to speak with a professional about what you’re going through. A general practitioner may be able to refer you to a therapist or other specialist.
They can assess your symptoms and help develop a clinical treatment plan tailored to your needs. This may include various options, such as medication and therapy.
Finding the right treatment for you may take some time, so be open with a doctor or healthcare professional about what is and isn’t working. They’ll work with you to find the best option.

What is the fastest way to stop depression?
For some people, the fastest way to reduce symptoms of depression may be to use prescribed medication. The type and dosage of medication may vary from person to person. Other methods that may help include talking with a mental health professional. You may also help reduce symptoms by taking a walk in nature or doing a calming activity.

What are the ways to overcome depression?
You may be able to relieve depression symptoms through therapy and some lifestyle changes, such as practicing mindfulness, getting regular exercise, and eating nutritious meals. In some cases, you may need medication to help.

What are 3 ways to help treat depression?
Treatment for depression can involve therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, lifestyle changes such as practicing meditation and limiting alcohol and drugs, and in some cases, taking medication.

What is the best method to treat depression?
The best method for treating depression can vary depending on your needs and the severity of your symptoms. It can involve therapy, medication, and other practices that help you accept your own challenges and emotions.

Why is dealing with depression so difficult?
Depression drains your energy, hope, and drive, making it difficult to take the steps that will help you to feel better. Sometimes, just thinking about the things you should do to feel better, like exercising or spending time with friends, can seem exhausting or impossible to put into action.

It’s the Catch-22 of depression recovery: The things that help the most are the things that are the most difficult to do. There is a big difference, however, between something that’s difficult and something that’s impossible. While recovering from depression isn’t quick or easy, you do have more control than you realize—even if your depression is severe and stubbornly persistent. The key is to start small and build from there. You may not have much energy, but by drawing on all your reserves, you should have enough to take a walk around the block or pick up the phone to call a loved one, for example.

Taking the first step is always the hardest. But going for a walk or getting up and dancing to your favorite music, for example, is something you can do right now. And it can substantially boost your mood and energy for several hours—long enough to put a second recovery step into action, such as preparing a mood-boosting meal or arranging to meet an old friend. By taking the following small but positive steps day by day, you’ll soon lift the heavy fog of depression and find yourself feeling happier, healthier, and more hopeful again.

Coping with depression tip 1: Reach out and stay connected
Getting support plays an essential role in overcoming depression. On your own, it can be difficult to maintain a healthy perspective and sustain the effort required to beat depression. At the same time, the very nature of depression makes it difficult to reach out for help. When you’re depressed, the tendency is to withdraw and isolate so that connecting to even close family members and friends can be tough.

You may feel too exhausted to talk, ashamed at your situation, or guilty for neglecting certain relationships. But this is just the depression talking. Staying connected to other people and taking part in social activities will make a world of difference in your mood and outlook. Reaching out is not a sign of weakness and it won’t mean you’re a burden to others. Your loved ones care about you and want to help. And if you don’t feel that you have anyone to turn to, it’s never too late to build new friendships and improve your support network.

Speak to a Licensed Therapist
BetterHelp is an online therapy service that matches you to licensed, accredited therapists who can help with depression, anxiety, relationships, and more. Take the assessment and get matched with a therapist in as little as 48 hours.

Take Assessment
HelpGuide is user supported. We earn a commission if you sign up for BetterHelp’s services after clicking through from this site. Learn more
How to reach out for depression support
Look for support from people who make you feel safe and cared for. The person you talk to doesn’t have to be able to fix you; they just need to be a good listener—someone who’ll listen attentively and compassionately without being distracted or judging you.

Make face-time a priority. Phone calls, social media, and texting are great ways to stay in touch, but they don’t replace good old-fashioned in-person quality time. The simple act of talking to someone face to face about how you feel can play a big role in relieving depression and keeping it away.

Try to keep up with social activities even if you don’t feel like it. Often when you’re depressed, it feels more comfortable to retreat into your shell, but being around other people will make you feel less depressed.

Find ways to support others. It’s nice to receive support, but research shows you get an even bigger mood boost from providing support yourself. So find ways—both big and small—to help others: volunteer, be a listening ear for a friend, do something nice for somebody.

Care for a pet. While nothing can replace the human connection, pets can bring joy and companionship into your life and help you feel less isolated. Caring for a pet can also get you outside of yourself and give you a sense of being needed—both powerful antidotes to depression.

Join a support group for depression. Being with others dealing with depression can go a long way in reducing your sense of isolation. You can also encourage each other, give and receive advice on how to cope, and share your experiences. If going to an in-person support group feels too difficult, some online therapy platforms offer virtual support groups.

10 tips for connecting with others
Talk to one person about your feelings.
Help someone else by volunteering.
Have lunch or coffee with a friend.
Ask a loved one to check in with you regularly.
Accompany someone to the movies, a concert, or a small get-together.
Call or email an old friend.
Go for a walk with a workout buddy.
Schedule a weekly dinner date.
Meet new people by taking a class or joining a club.
Confide in a clergy member, teacher, or sports coach.
Tip 2: Do things that make you feel good
In order to overcome depression, you have to do things that relax and energize you. This includes following a healthy lifestyle, learning how to better manage stress, setting limits on what you’re able to do, and scheduling fun activities into your day.

Do things you enjoy (or used to)
While you can’t force yourself to have fun or experience pleasure, you can push yourself to do things, even when you don’t feel like it. You might be surprised at how much better you feel once you’re out in the world. Even if your depression doesn’t lift immediately, you’ll gradually feel more upbeat and energetic as you make time for fun activities.

Pick up a former hobby or a sport you used to like. Express yourself creatively through music, art, or writing. Go out with friends. Take a day trip to a museum, the mountains, or the ballpark.

Manage stress
Not only does stress prolong and worsen depression, but it can also trigger it. Figure out all the things in your life that stress you out, such as work overload, money problems, or unsupportive relationships, and find ways to relieve the pressure and regain control.

Create a balanced schedule. It’s easy to fall into the trap of spending far more time working or completing chores than in making time for people and activities you enjoy. But to ease stress and avoid burnout, it’s important to find a healthy balance. Are there any responsibilities you can give up or delegate to others?

Practice relaxation techniques. A daily relaxation practice can help relieve symptoms of depression, reduce stress, and boost feelings of joy and well-being. Try yoga, deep breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, or meditation.

Practice gratitude. It sounds simplistic, but taking a few moments to consciously note the things you appreciate in your life can have a notable impact on your stress levels and mood. Even being grateful for the sun shining or a smile from a neighbor can help you keep things in perspective.

Develop a “wellness toolbox” to deal with depression
Come up with a list of things that you can do for a quick mood boost. The more “tools” for coping with depression you have, the better. Try and implement a few of these ideas each day, even if you’re feeling good.

Spend some time in nature.
List what you like about yourself.
Read a good book.
Watch a funny movie or TV show.
Take a long, hot bath.
Meditate.
Play with a pet.
Talk to friends or family face-to-face.
Listen to music.
Do something spontaneous and fun.
For more ideas on tools to give your mood a quick, effective boost, read: I Feel Depressed: 9 Ways to Deal with Depression.

Tip 3: Get moving
When you’re depressed, just getting out of bed can seem like a daunting task, let alone working out! But exercise is a powerful depression fighter—and one of the most important tools in your recovery arsenal. Research shows that regular exercise can be as effective as medication for relieving depression symptoms. It also helps prevent relapse once you’re well.

To get the most benefit, aim for at least 30 minutes of exercise per day. This doesn’t have to be all at once—and it’s okay to start small. A 10-minute walk can improve your mood for two hours.

Exercise is something you can do right now to boost your mood
Your fatigue will improve if you stick with it. Starting to exercise can be difficult when you’re depressed and feeling exhausted. But research shows that your energy levels will improve if you keep with it. Exercise will help you to feel energized and less fatigued, not more.

Find exercises that are continuous and rhythmic. The most benefits for depression come from rhythmic exercise—such as walking, weight training, swimming, martial arts, or dancing—where you move both your arms and legs.

Add a mindfulness element, especially if your depression is rooted in unresolved trauma or fed by obsessive, negative thoughts. Focus on how your body feels as you move—such as the sensation of your feet hitting the ground, or the feeling of the wind on your skin, or the rhythm of your breathing.

Pair up with an exercise partner. Not only does working out with others enable you to spend time socializing, it can also help to keep you motivated. Try joining a running club, taking a water aerobics or dance class, seeking out tennis partners, or enrolling in a soccer or volleyball league.

Take a dog for a walk. If you don’t own a dog, you can volunteer to walk homeless dogs for an animal shelter or rescue group. You’ll not only be helping yourself but also be helping to socialize and exercise the dogs, making them more adoptable.

Tip 4: Get a daily dose of sunlight
Sunlight can help boost serotonin levels and improve your mood. Whenever possible, get outside during daylight hours and expose yourself to the sun for at least 15 minutes a day. Remove sunglasses (but never stare directly at the sun) and use sunscreen as needed.

Take a walk on your lunch break, have your coffee outside, enjoy an al fresco meal, or spend time gardening.
Double up on the benefits of sunlight by exercising outside. Try hiking, walking in a local park, or playing golf or tennis with a friend.
Increase the amount of natural light in your home and workplace by opening blinds and drapes and sitting near windows.
If you live somewhere with little winter sunshine, try using a light therapy box.
Dealing with the winter blues
For some people, the reduced daylight hours of winter lead to a form of depression known as seasonal affective disorder (SAD). SAD can make you feel like a completely different person to who you are in the summer: hopeless, sad, tense, or stressed, with no interest in friends or activities you normally love. No matter how hopeless you feel, though, there are plenty of things you can do to keep your mood stable throughout the year.

Tip 5: Challenge negative thinking
Do you feel like you’re powerless or weak? That bad things happen and there’s not much you can do about it? That your situation is hopeless? Depression puts a negative spin on everything, including the way you see yourself and your expectations for the future.

When these types of thoughts overwhelm you, it’s important to remember that this is a symptom of your depression and these irrational, pessimistic attitudes—known as cognitive distortions—aren’t realistic. When you really examine them they don’t hold up. But even so, they can be tough to give up. You can’t break out of this pessimistic mind frame by telling yourself to “just think positive.” Often, it’s part of a lifelong pattern of thinking that’s become so automatic you’re not even completely aware of it. Rather, the trick is to identify the type of negative thoughts that are fueling your depression, and replace them with a more balanced way of thinking.

Negative, unrealistic ways of thinking that fuel depression
All-or-nothing thinking. Looking at things in black-or-white categories, with no middle ground (“If everything is not perfect, I’m a total failure.”)
Overgeneralization. Generalizing from a single negative experience, expecting it to hold true forever (“I had a bad date, I’ll never find anyone.”)
The mental filter – Ignoring positive events and focusing on the negative. Noticing the one thing that went wrong, rather than all the things that went right. (“I got the last question on the test wrong. I’m an idiot.”)
Diminishing the positive. Coming up with reasons why positive events don’t count (“She said she had a good time on our date, but I think she was just being nice.”)
Jumping to conclusions. Making negative interpretations without actual evidence. You act like a mind reader (“He must think I’m pathetic”) or a fortune teller (“I’ll be stuck in this dead-end job forever.”)
Emotional reasoning. Believing that the way you feel reflects reality (“I feel like such a loser. Everyone must be laughing at me!”)
‘Shoulds’ and ‘should-nots.’ Holding yourself to a strict list of what you should and shouldn’t do, and beating yourself up if you don’t live up to your rules. (“I should never have interviewed for that job. I’m an idiot for thinking I could get it.”)
Labeling. Classifying yourself based on mistakes and perceived shortcomings (“I’m a failure; an idiot; a loser.”)
How to challenge negative thinking
Keep a “negative thought log.” Whenever you experience a negative thought, jot it down on your phone or in a notebook—along with what triggered the negative thought. Once you identify the destructive thoughts patterns that contribute to your depression, you can start to challenge them. For example, if your significant other was short with you, you may have automatically assumed that the relationship was in trouble. However, a more realistic way to view it might be that your partner was just having a bad day.

Examine the evidence that your thoughts are true. When challenging your negative thoughts, ask yourself if there is any evidence that your thoughts or beliefs are not true? For example, if you’re thinking, “I’ll be stuck in this dead-end job forever,” how realistic is that expectation? Are there facts that you’re ignoring, such as the potential for sending out a resume and interviewing for another job? Is there another, more realistic way of looking at your situation?

Think outside yourself. Ask yourself, “Would I say what I’m thinking about myself to someone else?” If not, stop being so hard on yourself. Think about less harsh statements that offer more realistic descriptions. What would you tell a friend who had the same thought? Instead of labelling yourself a failure or a loser when something doesn’t go as planned, for example, look at things in a more realistic light: you made a mistake, but you can learn from it.  

Allow yourself to be less than perfect. Many depressed people are perfectionists, holding themselves to impossibly high standards and then beating themselves up when they fail to meet them. Battle this source of self-imposed stress by challenging your negative ways of thinking. We all have bad days and life is often unexpectedly messy. Ask yourself, “How might I look at this situation if I didn’t have depression?”

Socialize with positive people. Notice how people who always look on the bright side deal with challenges, even minor ones, like not being able to find a parking space. Then consider how you would react in the same situation. Even if you have to pretend, try to adopt their optimism and persistence in the face of difficulty.

As you cross-examine your negative thoughts, you may be surprised at how quickly they crumble. In the process, you’ll develop a more balanced perspective and help to relieve your depression.

Tip 6: Support your health by eating and sleeping well
What you eat has a direct impact on the way you feel. Aim for a balanced diet  with plenty of fruit and vegetables, and reduce your intake of food that can adversely affect your mood. This includes caffeine, alcohol, and processed food with high levels of chemical preservatives or hormones (found in some packaged food and cured meats).

Don’t skip meals. Going too long between meals can make you feel irritable and tired, so aim to eat something at least every three to four hours.

Minimize sugar and refined carbs. You may crave sugary snacks, baked goods, or comfort foods such as pasta or French fries, but these “feel-good” foods quickly lead to a crash in mood and energy. Aim to cut out as much of these foods as possible.

Boost your B vitamins. Deficiencies in B vitamins such as folic acid and B-12 can trigger depression. To get more, take a B-complex vitamin supplement or eat more citrus fruit, leafy greens, beans, chicken, and eggs.

Boost your mood with foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3 fatty acids play an essential role in stabilizing mood. The best sources are fatty fish such as salmon, herring, mackerel, anchovies, sardines, tuna, and some cold-water fish oil supplements.

Improve your sleep
Feeling tired can cause you to think irrationally, increase stress and anxious thoughts, and depress your mood.

Aim for 7-9 hours of sleep each night. Depression typically involves sleep problems; whether you’re sleeping too little or too much, your mood suffers.

Get on a better sleep schedule by learning healthy sleep habits. Try to go to sleep and get up at the same time every day, avoid bright screens within two hours of bedtime, develop a relaxing bedtime routine, and make sure your bedroom is cool, dark, and quiet.

Find healthy ways to get back to sleep. If you wake up in the night, keep the lights low, do a quiet, non-stimulating activity, such as reading a book, or practice a sleep meditation using guided imagery.

When to get professional help for depression
If you’ve taken self-help steps and made positive lifestyle changes and still find your depression getting worse, seek professional help. Needing additional help doesn’t mean you’re weak. Sometimes the negative thinking in depression can make you feel like you’re a lost cause, but depression can be treated and you can feel better!

Don’t forget about these self-help tips, though. Even if you’re receiving professional help, these tips can be part of your treatment plan, speeding your recovery and preventing depression from returning.